arewefastyet blog post (#780)
vitessio/website: content/en/blog/2021-07-09-announcing-vitess-arewefastyet.md

---
author: 'Florent Poinsard, Manan Gupta'
date: 2021-07-09
slug: '2021-07-09-announcing-vitess-arewefastyet'
tags: ['Vitess','MySQL','benchmark','arewefastyet']
title: 'Announcing Vitess Arewefastyet'
description: "Announcing Vitess Arewefastyet - Nightly Benchmarks Project"
---

Benchmarking is a critical technique for delivering high performance software.

> The basic idea behind benchmarking is measuring and comparing the performance of a software version against another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The basic idea behind benchmarking is measuring and comparing the performance of one software version against another.
```

> Over the years, many benchmarking techniques have emerged, but we can broadly separate them in two categories: micro and macro benchmarks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the years, many benchmarking techniques have emerged, but we can broadly separate them into two categories: micro and macro benchmarks.
```

Microbenchmarks measure a small part of the codebase, usually by isolating a single function call and calling it repeatedly, whereas macrobenchmarks measure the performance of the codebase as a whole and run in an environment similar to what end-users experience.
These two categories of benchmarks are analogous to unit tests and end-to-end tests.

> Vitess is critical part of the infrastructure of many large companies, and because of the impact that Vitess' performance has on real world adoption for our database, the Vitess team has a very serious and methodical commitment to performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vitess is a critical part of the infrastructure of many large companies, and because of the impact that Vitess' performance has on real world adoption for our database, the Vitess team has a very serious and methodical commitment to performance.
```

We try really hard to make sure that every Vitess version is faster than the previous one.

> To ensure that we meet this commitment we have created a continuous benchmarking toolset named “arewefastyet”, inspired by performance tracking effort of other open source projects such as [Firefox](https://arewefastyet.com/) or [Rust](https://arewefastyet.rs/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that we meet this commitment we have created a continuous benchmarking toolset named “arewefastyet”, inspired by performance tracking effort of other open source projects such as [Firefox](https://arewefastyet.com/) and [Rust](https://arewefastyet.rs/).
```

Triggering an execution results in the creation of a new pipeline, which is configured using a YAML file provided by the trigger.
The YAML file contains the required configurations to run the entire benchmark, some of which define how to provision the benchmark’s infrastructure, store results, notify maintainers, and so on.

Each execution gets a dedicated server on which the benchmark is run.
For the production deployment of arewefastyet, all the hardware used is provided by [Equinix Metal](https://metal.equinix.com).
The default configuration uses [m2.xlarge.x86](https://metal.equinix.com/developers/docs/servers/server-specs/#m2xlargex86) servers; these are bare-metal servers which greatly increase the reliability and accuracy of our benchmarks.
The provisioning of an execution’s infrastructure is accomplished through the use of Terraform, which lets us manage the exact configuration of our servers in a reproducible manner.
Once a server is provisioned, several [Ansible roles](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html) are executed to apply dynamic configurations and settings on each instance based on the benchmark we intend to run.

> Between two different benchmark runs, a server is likely going to be configured differently. For instance, a macro-benchmark needs to have a Vitess cluster created, whereas a micro-benchmark does not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the type of benchmark, the server is likely going to be configured differently. For instance, a macro-benchmark needs to have a Vitess cluster created, whereas a micro-benchmark does not.
```

Configuring a server implies installing required packages and binaries, tweaking hard drive and network settings, building the Vitess and arewefastyet codebases, and lastly setting up and deploying a Vitess cluster.
The settings of the Vitess cluster are based on the configuration initially provided by the trigger. The default configuration measures Vitess' performance while using a sharded [keyspace](https://vitess.io/docs/concepts/keyspace/) with six [vtgates](https://vitess.io/docs/concepts/vtgate/) and two [vttablets](https://vitess.io/docs/concepts/tablet/).
Once an execution’s server is ready to be used, Ansible’s final task is to call arewefastyet’s CLI to start the actual benchmark run.

Vitess is mostly written in Golang, and the Go standard library ships with a comprehensive testing framework which includes a micro-benchmarking toolset.

> Next to the numerous unit-test in Vitess' codebase, we can also find a multitude of micro-benchmarks implemented directly in Go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Along with the numerous unit tests in the Vitess codebase, we can also find a multitude of micro-benchmarks implemented directly in Go.
```

The setup of a macro-benchmark is, however, much more complicated since we want to reproduce an environment closer to what users will be running in their production deployments.
As mentioned earlier, we try to deploy a realistic configuration for our benchmark Vitess cluster, including: six vtgates, two vttablets, an [etcd](https://etcd.io) cluster, and a [vtctld](https://vitess.io/docs/concepts/vtctld/) server.
The actual benchmarking of a cluster is performed by a custom fork of [sysbench](https://github.com/planetscale/sysbench), a highly configurable lua-based tool that is designed to benchmark arbitrary data stores. We divide the execution of every macro-benchmark run into three steps: preparation, warm-up, and the actual run. The three steps are executed one by one by [arewefastyet’s macrobench command](https://github.com/vitessio/arewefastyet/blob/master/docs/arewefastyet_macrobench_run.md).
The preparation step is meant to create all the required data and files on the Vitess cluster.

> The warm-up steps runs a small benchmark, which is then discarded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The warm-up step runs a small benchmark, which is then discarded.
```

In addition to the external measurements captured by sysbench we also keep track of the internal Vitess metrics exposed by the cluster and a wide variety of operating system metrics.
To scrape and aggregate them, we start a Prometheus backend.
Once the benchmark has started, the metrics are funneled from our Prometheus instance to a centralized server where they are kept in an InfluxDB database.
A Grafana frontend runs adjacent to the InfluxDB server and provides the maintainer team of Vitess with real-time dashboards on each execution.
The number of metrics we can visualize is large, although the final report on the arewefastyet website focuses on two main measurements: CPU time and memory consumption.
These are the two global system metrics which give us the most insight into the overall resource usage of Vitess.
The number of supported metrics is not limited and meant to grow in the future.

The following diagram summarizes the execution process:

<img src="/files/blog-arewefastyet/execution-pipeline.png" width="auto" height="auto" alt="Execution Pipeline" />

## The Link With Vitess

> In order to continuously benchmark Vitess, arewefastyet has several cron jobs configured to run daily at midnight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to continuously benchmark Vitess, arewefastyet has several cron jobs configured to run daily.
```

These jobs take care of benchmarking the main branch, the release branches, tags, and PRs with the `Benchmark Me` label in the Vitess repository.
The results we get from these cron-triggered benchmarks are compared against previous benchmarks of the same type.

> This allows us to catch any performance regression as soon as they are merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows us to catch any performance regressions as soon as they are merged.
```

  - Release branch against the last patch release for that release.
  - Pull Request against the base of the head of the PR.

After these comparisons, if we find that any of the results have regressed by more than 10%, we send a Slack message to notify maintainers about the fact.
Furthermore, we benchmark the performance of both query planners that Vitess has: the current `v3` planner and the experimental, [under-work](https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/issues/7280), `Gen4` planner.
With this, we are able to track the performance boost that `Gen4` provides over the current `v3` planner.

## Website

All the results accumulated through the cron jobs are available to be visualized and compared on the website [arewefastyet](https://benchmark.vitess.io/).
These are all the different views into the benchmark data that we currently make available: 

### [Microbenchmark Page](https://benchmark.vitess.io/microbench)
This page can be used to compare the micro-benchmark results for all releases (after 7.0.0).
They can also be compared against the latest results on main.

<img src="/files/blog-arewefastyet/microbench.png" width="auto" height="auto" alt="Microbenchmark page" />

> Clicking on any of the individual benchmarks opens up another page where we can see the results of that micro-benchmark on the past few days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking on any of the individual benchmarks opens up another page where we can see the results of that micro-benchmark over the past few days.
```

We can also compare the results of Gen4 planner by using the toggle button in the menu bar (highlighted in the green box).

<img src="/files/blog-arewefastyet/macrobench.png" width="auto" height="auto" alt="Macrobenchmark page" />

### [V3 vs Gen4](https://benchmark.vitess.io/v3_VS_Gen4)
This page compares the performance of the `v3` planner and `Gen4` planner on all the releases after 10.0.0 in which it was introduced.

<img src="/files/blog-arewefastyet/v3VsGen4.png" width="auto" height="auto" alt="v3 VS Gen4 page" />

### [Search Page](https://benchmark.vitess.io/search)
This page can be used to check the results for a specific commit.
The functionality of the `Gen4` switch button remains the same.

<img src="/files/blog-arewefastyet/search.png" width="auto" height="auto" alt="Search page" />

### [Compare](https://benchmark.vitess.io/compare)
This page is similar to the search page except that it compares the results of two commits. 

<img src="/files/blog-arewefastyet/compare.png" width="auto" height="auto" alt="Compare page" />

## Summary

> Vitess' arewefastyet is not the first continuous benchmarking tool for a major open source project, but it is a rather unique one in that it runs and keeps track of both micro-benchmarks and end-to-end macro-benchmarks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vitess' arewefastyet is not the first continuous benchmarking tool for a major open-source project, but it is a rather unique one in that it runs and keeps track of both micro-benchmarks and end-to-end macro-benchmarks.
```

> We built arewefastyet to makes it easier for users to migrate to newer Vitess versions while having confidence in their performance, and to help our maintainers make sure that no regressions are introduced between releases. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We built arewefastyet to make it easier for users to migrate to newer Vitess versions while having confidence in their performance, and to help our maintainers make sure that no regressions are introduced between releases. 
```
